iMatix Corporation announces major new messaging product

Brussels, 15 March 2007: iMatix Corporation has released OpenAMQ/1.2,
a major new messaging product, as free software.  OpenAMQ is a mature
and tested AMQP product consisting of: high-performance messaging
broker, client libraries for C/C++, protocol scripting framework,
remote operator console, failover clustering, broker federation,
extensive documentation.

iMatix CEO Pieter Hintjens says, "iMatix's free software has a
reputation for being tough, fast, easy to use, and well documented.
OpenAMQ is no exception: we spent over eighteen months hardening this
software for production use in large-scale deployments."  In December
2006, JPMorgan deployed the iMatix OpenAMQ infrastructure as the
backbone for a global mission critical front-office application
accessed by thousands of users in its Equities line of business.

JPMorgan chose iMatix for its proven track record, sound architecture,
and its adherence to open standards and principles, thus enabling easy
integration and future flexibility.  "OpenAMQ has stood the test of
sustained production use in a demanding environment, proving to be
capable and predictable", said R. John O'Hara, executive director and
senior architect at JPMorgan.  "Also, iMatix has been an excellent
partner, demonstrating high levels of commitment which allowed us to
roll out the project efficiently and deliver the exceptional market
services our customers demand."

OpenAMQ focuses on simplicity of use, speed, and reliability.
Hintjens explains: "we don't try to do everything.  We focus on making
the most reliable, unbreakable server possible.  Less is more: while
the protocol (AMQP) provides some very complex features, we implement
the most essential core, and we make it fast and robust."

OpenAMQ is built in C/C++, is fully multithreaded, supports up to
128-way SMP, and runs on Linux, Solaris, and Windows.  OpenAMQ
interoperates with other AMQP products such as RabbitMQ and Qpid.

OpenAMQ/1.2 is released under the GPL (broker) and BSD license (client
libraries) at www.openamq.org.

For more information on iMatix Corporation see www.imatix.com or
contact Martin Lucina on mato@imatix.com.
